Enhance fabric-configs.md with detailed options (#8155)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/resource-configs/fabric-configs.md

id: "fabric-configs"
---

> This page describes configuration options specific to the **dbt-fabric** adapter for Microsoft Fabric Data Warehouse. It outlines supported materializations, incremental strategies (including merge and microbatch), cross-warehouse references, warehouse snapshots, and profile setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page describes configuration options specific to the `dbt-fabric` adapter for Microsoft Fabric Data Warehouse. It outlines supported materializations, incremental strategies (including [merge](#merge) and ]microbatch](#microbatch)), cross-warehouse references, warehouse snapshots, and profile setup.
```

## Materializations

Ephemeral materialization is not supported due to T-SQL not supporting nested CTEs. It may work in some cases when you're working with very simple ephemeral models.

### Tables

> Tables are the default materialization in dbt-fabric. When a model is configured as a table, dbt will create or replace the table in Fabric Data Warehouse on each run.

Reviewer: switching to active voice
```suggestion
Tables are the default materialization in dbt-fabric. When you configure a model as a table, dbt will create or replace the table in Fabric Data Warehouse on each run.
```

</Tabs>

> > **Limitation:** Nested CTEs (Common Table Expressions) are not supported in model materialization. Models using multiple nested CTEs may fail during compilation or execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Limitation:** Nested <Term id="cte"/> aren't supported in model materialization. Models using multiple nested CTEs may fail during compilation or execution.
```

> ## Table Clone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Table clone
```

</File>

## Views

> Views can be created using the `view` materialization:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create views using the `view` materialization:
```

```sql
{{ config(materialized='view') }}
select * from source_data
```

You can set this globally as well:

```yaml
models:
  my_project:
    +materialized: view
```

> > **Limitation:** Nested CTEs (Common Table Expressions) are not supported in model materialization. Models using multiple nested CTEs may fail during compilation or execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Limitation:** <Term id="cte"/> aren't supported in model materialization. Models using multiple nested CTEs may fail during compilation or execution.
```

Grants with auto provisioning is not supported by Microsoft Fabric Data Warehouse at this time.

> ## Incremental Models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Incremental models
```

> Incremental materializations are supported with multiple strategies. In **dbt-fabric**, the **default strategy is `merge`**, introduced in v1.9.7. Other supported strategies include `append`, `delete+insert`, and `microbatch`.

Reviewer: pick up review from here

### Merge (default)
The `merge` strategy automatically updates existing records and inserts new ones based on the configured `unique_key`.

```sql
{{
  config(
    materialized='incremental',
    unique_key='id'
  )
}}
select * from source_table
{% if is_incremental() %}
  where updated_at > (select max(updated_at) from {{ this }})
{% endif %}
```

### Append
Appends new records to the existing dataset.

```sql
{{
  config(
    materialized='incremental',
    incremental_strategy='append'
  )
}}
select * from new_data
```
### Delete+Insert
Deletes and re-inserts based on `unique_key`.

```sql
{{
  config(
    materialized='incremental',
    incremental_strategy='delete+insert',
    unique_key='id'
  )
}}
select * from updated_data
```

### Microbatch
The `microbatch` strategy processes data in bounded time intervals using an event timestamp column.

```sql
{{
  config(
    materialized='incremental',
    incremental_strategy='microbatch',
    event_time='event_timestamp',
    batch_size='1 day'
  )
}}

select * from raw_events
```
#### Notes

> - `event_time` must be a valid timestamp column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`event_time`](/reference/resource-configs/event-time) must be a valid timestamp column.
```

> - Each batch is processed independently, allowing efficient incremental refresh of large time-series datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- dbt processes each batch independently, allowing efficient incremental refresh of large time-series datasets.
```

> - If no `unique_key` is specified, dbt-fabric defaults to `append`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you don't specify a `unique_key`, dbt-fabric defaults to `append`.
```

> For more details, see [Incremental Models](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/incremental-models).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details, see [Incremental models](/docs/build/incremental-models).
```

## Permissions

The Microsoft Entra identity (user or service principal) must be a Fabric Workspace admin to work on the database level at this time. Fine grain access control will be incorporated in the future.

> ## Cross-Warehouse References

Reviewer: sentence casing 
```suggestion
## Cross-warehouse references
```

> ## Cross-Warehouse References

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Cross-warehouse references
```

The dbt-fabric adapter supports cross-warehouse queries using `source()` or `ref()` macros.

```sql
select * from {{ source('sales_dw', 'transactions') }}
union all
select * from {{ ref('customer_dim') }}
```

Ensure that the corresponding model or source definitions specify the correct `database:` parameter to reference another Fabric Warehouse.

Example `sources.yml`:
```yaml
sources:
  - name: sales_dw
    database: saleswarehouse
    schema: sales
    tables:
      - name: transactions
```
> To use cross-warehouse references or warehouse snapshots, ensure the identity configured here has access to all referenced Fabric Warehouses.

> ## Warehouse Snapshots

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Warehouse snapshots
```

> Microsoft Fabric’s warehouse snapshots are read-only representations of a warehouse at a specific point in time, retained for up to 30 days. They allow analysts to query a stable dataset—regardless of ongoing ETL updates—by “rolling forward” the snapshot timestamp so changes apply atomically. Warehouse snapshots are supported in dbt-fabric and allow tracking changes in Fabric Data Warehouse objects across runs. They are automatically created **before** and **after** `dbt run`, `dbt build`, and `dbt snapshot` commands. Your `profiles.yml` must define workspace_id and warehouse snapshot name to create a warehouse snapshot as a child item of your warehouse. Learn more [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/fabric/data-warehouse/warehouse-snapshot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Microsoft Fabric warehouse snapshots are read-only copies of your warehouse at a specific moment, kept for up to 30 days. They allow analysts query a stable dataset, even while ELT processes are updating the warehouse. By moving the snapshot’s timestamp forward, changes are applied all at once (atomically).

dbt-fabric supports warehouse snapshots, which helps track changes in Fabric Data Warehouse objects between dbt runs. Fabric automatically creates snapshots _before_ and _after_ you run the `dbt run`, `dbt build`, or `dbt snapshot` commands.

To use them, your `profiles.yml` must include the `workspace_id` and the warehouse snapshot name so dbt can create the snapshot as a child item of your warehouse. 

Learn more [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/fabric/data-warehouse/warehouse-snapshot)
```

```yaml
fabric_dw:
  target: dev
  outputs:
    dev:
      type: fabric
      server: "<your-fabric-server-name>"
      database: "<your-warehouse-name>"
      schema: "<default-schema>"
      authentication: CLI
      workspace_id: e4487eff-d67d-4b58-917c-ffbb61a5c05f
      warehouse_snapshot_name: dbt-dwtests-snpshot
      
### Behavior
- Before a dbt operation (`run`, `build`, `snapshot`), the adapter captures the pre-state of affected tables.
- After execution, the warehouse snapshot is created with snapshot timestamp.

For additional details:

> - [dbt Snapshot Documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/snapshots)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [dbt snapshot documentation](/docs/build/snapshots)
```

> - [Fabric Adapter Snapshots Reference](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/fabric-configs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Fabric adapter snapshots reference](/reference/resource-configs/fabric-configs)
```
